well Washington's unwavering support for
Israel has been criticized by many
around the world and that criticism has
increased during the past few weeks of
the war on Gaza Rosalyn Jordan looks at
the history of the ties between the two
countries including how it hasn't always
been as harmonious as many think thank
you for having me and Joe Biden is the
14th US president who has tried to
resolve the Israel palestin
conflict on the first day of the war in
Gaza Biden offered complete support for
Israel no calls on it to show restraint
we must be Crystal Clear we stand with
Israel Biden's support hearkens back to
that of President Harry Truman who in
1948 recognized the state of Israel
within 11 minutes of its Declaration of
Independence but some subsequent
presidents took a more tough love
approach Dwight Eisenhower Richard Nixon
and Ronald Reagan all condemned Israel
military action on occasion but Reagan
also started the practice of awarding
Israel $3 billion in Aid every year a
strong secure Israel is a shared
interest the George HW Bush
Administration was the first to threaten
to cut Aid to Israel if it didn't stop
illegally building settlements in the
occupied West Bank thank you for your
statement the Obama Administration took
the unusual step in 2016 of withholding
a veto in the UN Security Council after
Benjamin Netanyahu now prime minister
ignored Washington's request to stop
settlement expansion the US's exstension
cleared the way for the security Council
to demand Israel's stop construction
notably the question of us aid for
Israel never came up at either of the
Camp David Summits and it was never
raised by either presidents George W
bush or Donald Trump Trump's support
gave Israel what it craved the
recognition of Jerusalem as capital of
the Jewish State now with the war in
Gaza in its fifth month and the death
toll Rising some in Congress say Aid to
Israel must be made conditional there
should be no blank checks for any
country we cannot continue the pattern
where prime minister Netanyahu says
Thank you Mr President for America's
generous military
assistance and then thumbs his nose at
America's
legitimate requests there might be a
subtle change in US policy of foot the
US has circulated a draft Security
Council resolution on Gaza that includes
words it has refused to use before now a
temporary
ceasefire but still no definitive plan
to leverage billions of dollars in US
Aid to convince Netanyahu to change the
way he's conducting the war the show of
support yet to be matched by what
Washington says is its alarm over the
situation in Gaza Roselyn Jordan Al
jazer Washington we're going to bring in
maram Bashar Al jaz's senior political
analyst to discuss all of this so
rosen's report there saying that we
should understand that the relations
between the US and Israel have not
always been as strong as one might
anticipate but to listen to what we were
Hearing in the international court of
justice just a few hours ago it is quite
clear that the US is put Israel's
security as the priority for anything
that happens in the future true but it's
also true that um American Israel
relations after
1967 war and the occupation of
Palestinian and Arab territory has
generally been strong despite the ups
and downs it has maintained and remained
and even became stronger with the with
the
time um but 1967 was uh an inflection
year if you will in the
relationship in the two decades before
1967 Israel got in from the United
States something like a billion plus
dollars in 20 years a billion or so
dollars in the following two decades
after Israel occupied Palestinian and
Arab land it got 50 billion dollars
plus so you can imagine the difference
suddenly
Israel's occupation of Palestinian and
Arab territories became an American
Investment America started investing in
Israel not when it was weak and let's
say vulnerable and let's say in a
smaller territory without strategic
depth as it was between 1948 and
1967 after Israel won against the
combined forces of Arab militaries and
occupied a territory three times its
size that's when America got on the
action and doubled quadrupled and then
it basically went from 1 plus billion
dollars to $50 billion in American Aid
and in the past uh 50 60 years if you
take it in
$224 it's like 300 billion dollars of
American a so what's America getting for
its money this is the thing right so I
think it Israel and its occupation
of Arab and Palestinian territory became
a geopolitical asset for the United
States and at the time from
1967 to
1977 America was telling the Arab world
and Israel the only way you can get your
land back is if you stop allying
yourself with the Soviet Union and start
allying yourself with the United States
that was the primary condition at least
on Egypt in the beginning it had to move
from the the Soviet Camp to the American
Camp during the Cold War in order to
recover the Sinai and it was the same
thing for the syrians it when that as
lucky but also for even for American
assets like Jordan it became even closer
to the United States and its
relationship with the United stat would
help it recover and establish peace it
was the same thing as of the PLO in 1988
you they would have to distance
themselves from anything denounce as it
were terrorism and and align themselves
with the United States if they had any
chance to recover so occupation of
Palestine became an asset for the United
States that it would invest money in
Israel in order to maintain it and
refuse reject any notion of surrendering
it except if the Arabs start accepting
American dictates so the I I understand
what you were saying about the Israel
being essentially a front line for one
of a better for us interests in the
Middle East particularly against Arab
states but in the Trump Administration
we had the Abraham Accords where the UAE
and Bahrain signed normalization
agreements with Israel the Biden
Administration has been pushing Saudi
Arabia to do the same thing with Israel
so if that is beginning to coales to
some degree and these are significant
Powers within the Middle East where does
the US see the benefit still in
maintaining Israel as that front line
when Biden first became president in the
so-called Biden Doctrine in his first
major speech on foreign policy he made
very clear America is back America is
not going to leave any vacuum for Iran
Russia and China to fill in in the
Middle East so it was a clear message to
all America's Nemesis around the world
the three main Regional and
international forces that America was
going to use its leverage and influence
again under Biden in order to make sure
that it will keep all three countries
all three powers outside the
geopolitical calculus to the Middle East
and hence it started investing in the
Abraham Accords and in new
normalizations of relation between Saudi
Arabia and Israel as well as other
countries in order to build a new
axis of the so-called Israel moderate
Arab
regimes against or devoured of Russian
Chinese and Iranian influence in order
to Serve American geopolitical interest
in the region malan we appreciate it as
always M Bashar thank you very much
indeed